---
layout: base
title: about jeff
---

Hello, my name is Jeff.  I am a polyglot programming living and working in the 
Chicago area.  I have a large interest in open source technologies and web 
development.  This is a blog that I am using to write about my journey through the
computer world.  Hopefully I will write more in this than in the one I keep about
my real life (which isn't as boring as the lack of writing my convey).  But this
will **hopefully** be constricted only to my experiences dealing with computers (in
whatever manner).  So a little about myself...

I first started programming in my freshman year in college (in 2005), so I started
**really** late.  I have been on a feverish sprint to catch up to all of my peers
and seniors who got big head starts.  I started with C, in an intro to programming
course, where I quickly excelled and decided on a career in software.  I then was
taught shell scripting (using `/bin/ksh`) and python.  The following year I learned
OOP with C++ and Java.  During this time, I taught myself PHP and Javascript in an
effort to teach myself web programming.  After college, I worked as a hybrid web
developer and C++ developer for a company.  Then moved to Chicago with my wife, 
where she found her dream job.

I am a primary Linux user.  I made the full jump in 2010 to Ubuntu.  A year later,
at the urging of a friend, I switched to Arch, which I have loved and used since.
Now for some of the random things that come with being a big Linux user...  My
window manager of choice (for now) is xmonad, even though I have been using subtle
on my laptop off and on.  I am a vim user (you can check out my config, which I
have been slowly growing).

In terms of programming, the languages I know are a lot (Haskell, Python, Ruby,
Javascript, Java, C++, C to name a few).  I consider myself an "expert" in Python
and Javascript.  I am comfortable doing Java, Ruby, C++, or C (I am either rusty or
lacking experience, but not familiarity).  I would like to become more comfortable
with Haskell, but it is not a language the offers many chances to really get to
know it (my major experience is with my window manager).  My experiences are 
primarily in web development and higher level networking, but I am comfortable in
standalone applications and can always shake off the rust in low level hardware
programming (my major focused in that area).
